\section{Related Work}
% I: INTRODUCTION
% 1-2 paragraphs briefly explaining the purpose of the section 
This section reviews previous work on machine learning models predicting recidivism, stability and reliability of ML models, and fairness/accuracy concerns in recidivism risk assessment.
% mention how the review is structured (either by theme or type of study)

% II: Discuss popular ML and actuarial models
Multiple studies have explored the performance and accuracy of machine learning models used to predict recidivism, with a strong emphasis on comparative evaluation. Both Tollenaar and Heijden (2013) and Travaini et al. (2022) conducted large scale comparisons on multiple ML models, finding  that the classical models performed equally well or better than the more complex ML models. Travaini et al.emphasized that aside from its algorithm, a model's success depends on high quality input data, data standardization, and feature selection. Ngo, Govindu, and Agarwal (2018) observed that no single model consistently outperformed the others across evaluation all metrics, suggesting that the ``best'' model is context-dependent. 

These findings highlight a key limitation in the literature: that there is no single clear way to optimize model performance. As Biddle (2022) argues, because it is impossible to achieve all ``epistemic goals'' simultaneously in an ML system, system designers must strategically select which goals to prioritize and which failures to tolerate. As a result, these decisions are not neutral but value-laden as  different types of errors may impact stakeholders in different ways.

The aforementioned studies on ML models used in predicting recidivism have mostly been comparative studies as there is a saturation of research that exists within the domain that focuses on studying the accuracy and performance of these models. 
In 2016, Propublica published a report analyzing the COMPAS recidivism for its accuracy and to test whether the model was biased against certain groups. They found that while COMPAS misclassified white and black defendants to recidivate at roughly the same rate (59\% and 61\%, repsectively), black defendants who did not recidivate over a two-year period were often predicted to be at a higher risk than white defendants, while white defendants who did recidivate within the same period were twice as likely to be misclassified as low risk than their black counterparts. Black defendants were also twice as likely to be misclassified as high risk for violent recidivism than white defendants, while white defendants were 63\% more likely to be misclassified as low risk for violent recidivism. Their analysis on violent recidivism also showed that even by controlling for prior crimes, future recidivism, age, and gender, black defendants were 77\% more likely to be labeled as high risk than white defendants. 

Because of the Propublica study, multiple fairness studies on ML models predicting recidivism have emerged as a result. 

Dressel and Frid (2018) investigated whether algorithmic recidivism predictions are more accurate or less biased than humans using fairness metrics, and they found that the model (COMPAS) was just as accurate in its predictions as people with no special training or criminal justice expertise. They also found that both COMPAS and the people were unfair to black defendants in the exact same way. Moreover, the study discovers that a model that uses more than 100+ features can perform just as accurately as a model that uses two features.

Karimi-Haghighi and Castillo (2021) evaluated the effectiveness and algorithmic fairness of ML models such as logistic regression compares to RisCanvi, an expert-based recidivism risk assessment tool used in the Catalan prison system. Their study found that while ML models achieved slightly higher predictive accuracy than RisCanvi, these improvements were modest. Their study also observed that these models frequently introduced algorithmic discrimination across groups of nationality and age. They conclude that ML-based recidivism tools are not a ``silver bullet'' and should not be implemented without specific procedures to mitigate algorithmic bias.

Wadsworth et al. (2018) proposed an adversarially-trained neural network to mitigate racial bias in recidivism predictions, specifically targeting the disparaties found in COMPAS. Their approach utilizes a dual-network structure: a ``Predictor'' network that estimates recidivism risk and an ``Adversary'' network that attempts to identify the defendant's race from the predictor`s output. By optimizing the predictor to maximize the adversary`s loss, the model effectively ``cleans'' the output of race-correlated information. The resulting model achieved higher predictive accuracy (AUC of 0.70) than COMPAS (AUC of 0.66) while significantly reducing gaps in demographic parity and equality of odds. The authors conclude that this adversarial framework encourages the use of more holistic feature information, successfully decoupling risk scores from racially-biased historical data.